the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
coreware at
ocw.mit.edu okay so so far we've learned
about partial derivatives and how to use
them to find Minima and Maxima of
function of two variables or several
variables and now we try to study more
in detail how functions of several
variables behave how to compute their
variations how to estimate their
variation in arbitrary directions and so
for that we're going to need some more
tools actually to study these things
so more tools to
study
functions
and so today's topic is going to be
differen
shs and just to motivate
that let me remind you about you know
one trick that you probably know from
single variable calculus namely implicit
differentiation so let's say that you
have a function yal f
ofx
then you would sometimes
write
Dy equals frime of x * DX and then maybe
you
would excuse me can you please take a
seat
and can you please take a seat and you
know sit down that would
be better thank you
so you no so we use implicit
differentiation to
actually
relate infin changes in y with infal
changes in X and one thing we can do
with that for example is actually figure
out the rate of change Dy by DX but also
the reciprocal DX by Dy and so for
example let's say that we have y
equals inverse sign of
X then we can write X = sin of Y and
from there we can actually find out what
is the derivative of this function if we
didn't know the answer already by
writing
DX equals cosine y
Dy and so that tells us that dy/
DX is going to be 1 / cosine Y and now
sign the relation to S is basically 1
/un of 1 - x^
2 and that's how you find the formula
for the derivative of the inverse sign
function okay formula that probably you
already knew but that's one way to
derive
it
so now we are going to use also these
kinds of notations DX Dy and so on but
use them for functions of several
variables and of course we'll have to
learn what are the rules of manipulation
and what we can do with
them
so so the actual name of that is the
total differential as opposed to the
partial
derivatives because well it's going to
be the total differential because it
includes all of the various causes that
can change the can sorry all of the
contributions that can cause the value
of your function f to
change
so namely let's say that you have a
function f maybe of three variables x y
z then you will write DF equals F subx
DX plus F suby
Dy plus F subz
DZ okay or maybe
just to remind you of the other notation
partial F partial X DX plus partial F
partial y Dy plus partial F over partial
Z
DZ
now what is this object what you know
what are the things on either side of
this equality well they're called
differentials and they're not numbers
they're not vectors they're not matrices
they're a different kind of object so it
these things have their own rules of
manipulations and we have to learn what
we can do with them
so how do we think about them so first
of all how do we not think about
them okay so here's an important thing
to pit full to avoid so
important
d f is
not the same thing as Delta F okay so
that thing is meant to be a number it's
going to be a number once you have a
small variation of x a small variation
of Y small variation of Z these are
numbers Delta X Delta y Delta Z are
actual numbers and this becomes a
number this guy actually is not a number
you
cannot give it a particular value
all you can do with a differential is
express it in terms of other
differentials so in fact this DX Dy and
DZ well there mostly symbols out there
but if you want to think about them they
are the differentials of X Y and
Z so in fact you can think of these
differentials as
placeholders where you will put other
things so of course they represent you
know there's this idea of changes in X
YZ and F
um but so one way that one could explain
it I don't really like that is to say
they represent Infinitis imal
changes another way to say it and I
think that's probably closer to the
truth is that these things are somehow
placeholders to put values and get a
tangent
approximation so for example if I do
replace these symbols by Delta X Delta Y
and Delta Z numbers then I will actually
get a numerical quantity and that will
be an approximation formula for Delta f
it will be the linear approximation of
the tangent plane
approximation so what we can
do well so let me start first with maybe
something even before
that so the first thing that it does is
it can encode how
changes in
XYZ affect the value of
F I would say that's the more that's the
most General answer to what is this
formula what are these
differentials it's a relation between
XYZ and
F and in
particular so this is a
placeholder
for small
variations Delta X Delta y Delta
Z to get an approximation
formula which is Delta f is
approximately equal to F subx Delta X
Plus FY Delta y plus FZ Delta Z sorry
it's getting cramped but I'm sure you
know what's going
here
so and observe how this one is actually
equal while that one is approximately
equal so they're really not the
same another thing that the notation
suggests we can do and I claim we can do
is divide everything by some variable
that everybody depends on so say for
example that X Y and Z actually depend
on some parameter T
then they will vary at a certain rate
dxdt dydt
dzdt and what the differential will tell
us then is the rate of change of f as a
function of T when you plug in these
values of XYZ you will get dfdt by
dividing everything by DT in
here
okay
so the thir thing we can do is
divide
by say something like
DT to
get an infinitism rate of change or
instant well
let me just say a rate of
change okay
so dfdt equals F subx DX DT plus F suby
Dy
DT plus F subz DZ DT and that
corresponds to the situation
where X is a function of
t y is a function of
T and Z is a function of T then that
means you can plug in these values into
F to get well the value of f will depend
on T and then you can find the rate of
change with t of the value of
f
okay so these are the basic holes
and this is known as the chain
rule it's one instance of a chain
rule which tells you when you have a
function that depends on something and
that something in turn depends on
something else how to find the rate of
change of a function on the new variable
in terms of the derivatives of the
function and also the dependence between
the various
variables
okay any questions so
far
no okay so a word of warning in
particular about you know what I said up
here uh it's kind of unfortunate but the
textbook actually has a serious mistake
on that me they do have a couple of
formulas where they mix a d with a Delta
and I would like you not to do that
please okay so
I mean there's D's and there's deltas
and basically they don't live in the
same world they don't see each
other the textbook is lying to
you
okay so let's see I mean here I made you
know so the first first and the second
claims I don't really need to justify
because the first one is just you know
stating some general principle but I'm
not making a precise mathematical claim
the second one well I mean we know that
approximation formula already so I don't
need to justify it for you but on the
other hand this formula here I mean you
probably have a right to expect some you
know reason for why this works why is
this valid after all I first told you we
have these new mysterious objects and
then I'm telling you well we can do that
but you know I kind have pulled it out
of my hat I mean I don't have a hat
but
so okay
so why is this
valid how can I get to
this so here's a first attempt at
justifying how to get there
okay
so let's
see well we said
DF is f subx DX plus F suby Dy plus F
subz
DZ but we know well if x is a function
of T then DX is X Prime of T DT or DX DT
DT as you prefer okay Dy is y Prime of T
DT DZ is z Prime of T
DT so if we plug these into that
formula we'll get that DF is f subx * X
Prime of T DT plus F sub y y y Prime of
T DT plus f
subz z Prime of T
DT
and now well if I have a relation
between DF and DT see I got DF equals
something time DT that means the rate of
change of f with respect to T should be
that
coefficient
so if I
divide by DT
then I
get the formula
that's I get the chain
R now well you know that kind of works
but that shouldn't be completely
satisfactory let's say that you're a
true skeptic and you don't believe in
differentials yet then you know it's
maybe not very good that I actually used
this
more of these differential notations in
deriving the answer so that's actually
not how it's proved you know the way in
which you prove the chain rle is not
this
way because we don't we shouldn't have
too much trust in differentials just yet
I mean at the end of today's lecture yes
probably we should believe in them but
so far we should still be a little bit
you know reluctant to believe know this
kind of strange object telling us weird
so here's a better way to think about
it so one thing that we have trust in so
far are approximation
formulas at least we should have trust
in them
so we should believe that if we
change x a little bit if we change y a
little
bit
then we are actually going to get a
change in F that's approximately given
by these
guys so now well this is true for any
changes in XYZ but in particular let's
look at the changes that we get if we
just take these formulas as functions of
time and change time a little bit by
Delta
t Okay so we'll actually use for changes
in XYZ in a small time delta
T and let's divide Everybody by delta
T okay here I'm just dividing numbers so
I'm not actually playing any tricks on
you um I mean we don't really know what
it means to divide differentials but
dividing numbers is something we
know
and now if I take delta T very
small then this
guy tends to the
differential sorry tends to the
derivative
dfdt remember the definition of dfdt is
the limit of this ratio when the time
interval delta T tends to zero so that
means if I get you know if I choose
smaller and smaller values of delta T
then these ratios of numbers will
actually tend to some value and that
value is the
derivative so similarly here Delta X
over delta T when delta T is really
small will tend to the derivative
dxdt
and similarly for the
others
so okay
so that
means
particular um so if we take the limit
as delta T TS to Z we get
dfdt on one side on the other side we
get F subx DX
DT plus f suby
dydt plus F subz
dzdt and the approximation becomes
better and better remember when we write
approximately equal that means that it's
not quite the same but if we take
smaller and smaller variations then
actually will end up with values that
are getting closer and closer so when we
take the limit as delta T tends to zero
eventually we get an
equality okay I mean mathematicians have
more complicated wordss to justify this
statement but uh I will spare them for
now and you will see about them when you
take analysis if you go on in that
direction okay any questions so
far
no okay so let's check maybe things in
an example let's say that we really
don't have any faith in these
things
and so let's try to do
it
so let's say I give
you a function that's x^2 y +
z and let's say that maybe X will be t y
will be e to the T and Z will be sin
t
okay so what does the chain rule say
well the chain
rule tells us
that DW
DT is so we start with partial W over
partial
X well what is that that's
2xy times so maybe I should point out
this is W subx Times DX
DT
plus Well w sub y is
X2 *
dydt
plus W subz that's going to be just one
DZ
DT okay
and so now let's plug in the actual
values of these things so X is T Y is e
to the T so that will be 2 t e to the T
DX DT
is
1 plus x^2 is
t^2 dydt is e to the
t plus dzdt is cosine
t okay so at the end of calculation we
get 2 t e to t plus t e to the t plus
cosine
T that's what the chain rule tells us
how else could we find
that well we could just plug in values
of X Y and Z Express W as a function of
T and take its derivative okay let's do
that just for
verification it should be exactly the
same answer
and in fact in this case the two
calculations are roughly equal in
complication
but say that your function of XYZ was
much more complicated than that or maybe
you actually didn't know a formula for
it you only knew its partial derivatives
then you would need to use the chain
rule so sometimes plugging in values is
easier but not
always
so let's just check quickly so the other
method would be to
substitute so w as a function of
T well so remember W was was it x
y
plus Z so as a function of T well X was
T so get t^2 Y is e to the t plus Z sin
T So D
wdt we know how to take the
derivative using single variable
calculus well we should know if we don't
know then we should take a look at 1801
again so by the product rule that will
be der dtive of t is 2 T * e to the t
plus T ^ 2 * the derivative of e to the
t is e the t plus cosine
T okay and that's the same answer as
over
there so I ended up writing up you know
maybe I wrote slightly more here but
actually the amount of calculations
really was pretty much the
same
okay any questions about that
yes uh what kind of object is W
so well I was intending you know you can
think of w as just another variable
that's given as a function of X Y and Z
for example so you have a function of
XYZ defined by this formula and I call
it w I call it value W so that then I
can substitute T instead of XYZ
so w
is well let's think of w as a function
of three variables okay and then when I
plug in the dependence of these three
variables on T then it becomes just a
function of
T I mean really my w here is pretty much
what I called f
before there's no you know there's no
major difference between the
two
okay any other
questions
no
okay so let's see here's an application
of what we've seen so let's say that you
want to understand actually all these
rules about taking derivatives in single
variable calculus so what I showed you
at the beginning and then erased
basically justifies how to take the
derivative of a reciprocal
function and for that you didn't need
multivariable calculus but let's try to
justify the product rule for example for
the
derivative
so an application of this
actually is to
justify the product and quotient
holes
so let's think for example of a function
of two variables u and v that's just the
product
UV okay and let's say that u and v are
actually functions of one variable
T then well d by DT DF DT so let's say d
of UV over
DT is given
by the chain hole applied to F right
this is DF
DT so DF DT should be F sub u d u
DT plus F subv time
dvdt
right but now what is the partial of f
with respect to U it's V so that's v d
DT and partial of f with respect to V is
going to be just
U so you get back the usual product rule
okay uh that's a slightly complicated
way of deriving it but that's a valid
way
of understanding how to take the
derivative of a product by thinking of
the product first as a function of two
variables which are u and v and then
saying oh but u and v were actually
functions of a variable T and then you
do the differentiation in two stages
using the chain
rule okay similarly you can do the
quotient rule
let's do it just for
practice so if I give you the function g
equals U over V so right now I'm
thinking of it as a function of two
variables u and v but u and v themselves
are actually going to be functions of
T
then well DG
DT is going to be partial G partial U
how much is
that how much is partial g paral u one/
v times D
DT
plus well next we need to have paral G
partial V well what's the derivative of
this with respect to V well here we need
to know how to differentiate the inverse
it's minus u/ v^
2 time
dvdt okay and that's actually the usual
quo hole just written in a slightly
different
way
I mean just in case you really want to
see it if you clear denominators to put
the V squ then you will see um basically
V well U Prime * V minus V Prime *
U
okay
okay now let's go to something even more
slight even more crazy I claim we can do
chain rules with more
variables so let's say that I
have a quantity let's call it w today
for now so let's say I have quantity W
it's a function of say two variables X
and Y
and so in the previous setup X and Y
depended on some parameter
T but actually let's now look at the
case where X and Y themselves are
functions of several variables let's say
of two more variables let's call them u
and
v okay so I'm going to stay with these
abstract letters but you know if it
bothers you if it sounds completely
unmotivated think think about it maybe
in terms of something you might know say
polar coordinate let's say that I have a
function that's defined in terms of the
polar coordinate variables R and Theta
and then I know actually I want to
switch to usual coordinates X and Y all
the other way around I have a function
of X and Y and I want to express it in
terms of the PO coordinates are in
F then I would like to know maybe how
the Dera
atives with respect to the various sets
of variables are related to each
other okay
so one way I could do it is of course to
say well
now if I plug the formula for x and the
formula for
Y into the formula for f then W becomes
a function of u and v and I can try to
take its partial derivatives if I have
explicit formulas well that could work
but maybe the formulas are
complicated typically if I switch you
know between rectangular and polar
coordinates there might be inverse trig
there might be maybe arct tangent to
express the polar angle in terms of X
and Y and then I don't really want to
actually substitute AR tangents
everywhere maybe I'd rather deal with
the
derivatives
so how do I do that
so the
question is what are partial W over
partial U and partial W over partial
V in
terms of so let's see what do we need to
know in order to understand that well
probably we should know how W depends on
X and Y if we don't know that then we
probably to
okay
so partial W partial X partial W partial
y should be
required what else should we know well
it would probably help to know how X and
Y depend on u and v if we don't know
that then we don't really know how to do
it either so we need also well U subx uh
sorry we have way around x sub u x subv
uh y sub u y subv so we have a lot of
partials in
there
well so let's see how we can do
that so let's start by writing
DW so we know that
DW
is partial F Well I don't know why I
have two names W and F I mean w and F
are really the same thing here but let's
say F subx DX
plus F suby
Dy okay so far that's our new friend the
differential now what do we want to do
with it Well we'd like to get rid of DX
and Dy because we'd like to express
things in terms of you know the question
we're asking ourselves is let's say that
I change you a little bit how does w
change so of course what will happen is
if I change VI a little bit then X and Y
will change how do they change well
that's given to me by the
differential right so
DX is going to
be well I can use the
differential again you know DX well X is
a function of u and v that will be x sub
U *
du plus x subv *
DV
okay that's again taking the
differential of a function of two
variables does that make
sense then we have the other guy F sub y
times what is dy well similarly Dy is y
sub U du plus y subv
DV and now we have a relation between DW
and du and DV we're expressing how w
reacts to changes in u and v which was
our goal now let's actually collect
terms so that we see it a bit
better so that's going to be f subx * x
sub U plus F sub y * y sub U du
plus F subx X subv Plus f suby y subv DV
and so now we have DW equals something
du plus something DV
well that coefficient here has to be
partial F partial U what else could it
be right that's the rate of change of w
with respect to U if I forget what
happens when I change V that's the
definition of a
partial similarly this one has to be
partial F over partial
V that's because it's the rate of
change with respect to V if I keep U
constant so that these guys are
completely
ignored so now you see how the total
differential accounts for somehow all
the partial derivatives that come as
coefficients of the individual variables
in these
expressions okay so let me maybe rewrite
these formulas in a more visible way and
then re explain them to
you okay so here's the chain rule for
this situation with two intermediate
variables and two variables that you
express these in terms
of so in our setting we get partial F of
our partial U equals partial F of our
partial X partial X over partial U plus
partial F of partial y time partial y
over partial
U and the other one same thing with v
instead of
U partial F partial X time partial X
partial V plus partial F partial y
partial y partial
V so
I have to explain various things about
these formulas because they look
complicated and actually they're not
that
complicated so a couple of things to
know first thing so how do we remember a
formula like that well that's easy we
have we want to know how F depends on U
well what does f depend on actually it
depends on X and Y so we'll put partial
F partial X and partial F partial y now
now X and Y why are they here well
they're here because they actually
depend on you as well how does X depend
on you well the answer is partial X
partial U how does y depend on U the
answer is partial y partial y partial U
so see the structure of this formulas is
simple to find the partial of f with
respect to some new variable you use the
partials with respect to the variables
that F was initially defined in terms of
X and Y and you multiply them by the
partials of X and Y in terms of the new
variable that you want to look at V here
and you sum these things
together okay so that's the structure of
a formula um why does it work well let
me explain it to you in a slightly
different
language so this asks us how does f
change if I change you a little bit okay
well why would F change if you changes a
little bit well it would change because
F actually depends on X and Y and X and
Y depend on U if I change U how quickly
does X Change well the answer is partial
X partial U and now if I change X at
this rate how does that cause F to
change well the answer is partial F
partial x times this
guy well at the same time Y is also
changing how fast is y changing if I
change U well the rate of partial y
partial U but now if I change how does f
change well the rate of change is
partial F partial y so the product is
the effect of you know how you changes
changing Y and therefore changing F now
what happens in real life if I change
you a little bit well both X and Y
change at the same time so how does f
change well it's the sum of the two
effects okay does that make
sense
good uh of course if F depends on more
variable then you just have you know you
just have more terms in
here okay here's another thing that may
be a little bit confusing so what is
tempting well what's tempting here would
be to simplify these formulas by you
know removing these partial
X's so let's simplify by partial X let's
simplify by partial y we get partial F
partial U equals partial F partial U
plus partial F partial U something is
not working
properly okay so why doesn't it work
well the answer is precisely because
these are partial derivatives these are
not total derivatives and so you cannot
simplify them in that way I mean and
that's actually the reason why we use
this curly D rather than a straight D
it's to remind us beware there's these
simplifications that we can do with
straight D that are not legal
here so somehow when you have a partial
derivative you must resist the urge of
simplifying
things
okay so no simplifications in here
that's the simplest formula you can
get okay any questions at this
point
no uh
yes so when would you use this and what
does it describe well it's basically
when you have a function given in terms
of a certain set of
variables because maybe there's a simple
expression in terms of those variables
but ultimately what you care about is
not those variables X and Y but another
set of variables here u and v so X and Y
are giving you you know a nice formula
for f but actually the relevant
variables for your problem Are u and v
and you know how X and Y are related to
u and v so of course what you could do
is you could plug the formulas you know
the way that we did substituting but
maybe that will give you very
complicated EXP expressions and maybe
it's actually easier to just work with
the derivatives so the important claim
here is basically we don't need to know
the actual formulas all we need to know
is the rates of changes if we know all
these rates of change then we know how
to take these derivatives without
actually having to plug in values
yes yes you could certainly do the same
things in terms of T if you know If X
and Y were functions of T instead of
being functions of u and v then it would
be the same thing and you would have the
same formulas that I had uh well over
there I still have it so why does that
one have straight D's well the answer is
I could put curly D if I wanted but I
end up with a function of a single
variable so if you have a single
variable then the partial with respect
to that variable is the same thing as
the usual derivative so we don't
actually need to worry about Curly in
that case okay but that one is indeed
it's a special case of this one where
instead of X and Y depending on two
variables u and v they depend on a
single variable T now of course whether
you call your variables you know any
name you want it doesn't
matter but so this is just a slight
generalization of that well not quite
because here I also had a z see I'm I'm
trying to just confuse you by giving you
functions that depend on various numbers
of variables uh if you have a function
of 30 variables things work the same way
just longer and you're going to run out
of letters in the alphabet before the
end okay any other
questions
no yes what
oh
yes
Andi so if you and V themselves depend
on another variable then you would you
know continue with your chain rules
maybe you would would know how to
express partial X partial u in terms
using that chain rule uh sorry so if
sorry if youu and V depended on yet
another variable then you could get the
derivative with respect to that using
first the chain rule to pass from UV to
that new variable and then you would
plug in these formulas for the partials
of f respect to u and v so in fact if
you have several substitutions to do you
can always arrange to use one chain rule
at a time you just have to you know do
them in
sequence um so that's why we don't
actually learn that but you can just do
it by repeating the process I mean
probably at that stage the easiest to
not get confused actually is to
manipulate differentials because that's
probably
easier yes
Rel ah so curly F does not exist that's
easy okay Curly F makes no sense but by
itself it doesn't exist alone what
exists is only curly F curly d f over
curly some variable and then that
accounts only for the rate of change
with respect to that variable leaving
the others fixed while straight DF is
somehow a total variation of F and so it
accounts for all of the partial
derivatives and their combined
effects
okay uh any more
questions
no okay so let me just
finish very quickly by telling you
again you know one example where
concretely you might want to do this is
you have a function that you want to
switch between rectangular and polar
coordinates
so you know just to make things a little
bit more concrete so if you had polar
coordinates that means that you know in
the plane instead of using coordinates X
and Y you will coordinates you will use
coordinates R distance to the origin and
Theta the angle from the
xaxis so the change of variables for
that is xal R cosine Theta and yal R sin
Theta and so that
means well if you have a
function f that depends on X and Y then
in fact you can plug these and get a
function of r and Theta and then you can
ask yourself well what is partial F over
partial
R and that's going to be well you want
to
take partial F partial X partial X
partial
R plus partial F partial y partial y
partial R and so that will end up being
actually F subx time cosine
Theta plus F sub y * sin Theta and you
can do the same thing to find partial F
partial Theta so you can express
derivatives either in terms of X Y or in
terms of R and Theta with simple
relations between
them and
the oh yes and one last thing I should
say so on Thursday we'll learn about
more tricks we can play with variations
of functions and one that's important
because you need to know it actually to
do the P set is the gradient Vector so
the gradient
[Applause]
Vector it's simply a vector so you use
this downward pointing triangle as the
notation for the gradient it's simply a
vector whose components are the partial
derivatives of the function okay so it's
I mean in a way you can think of a
differential as a way to package partial
derivatives to together into some weird
object well the gradient is also a way
to package partials together so we'll
see on Thursday what it's good for but
uh some of the problems on the pet use
it
so